https://askubuntu.com/questions/220506/how-to-increase-the-disk-space-of-an-ubuntu-vmware-guest-without-the-cd



Extend Ubuntu Disk Volume with GParted after Resizing Hard Drive
by babarehner
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cDgUwWkvuIY

Download gparted_live iso for debian or windows, then:


HZ simpilied instructions:

first expand the space on the VM settings 

1) On VM set to load the ubuntu install iso on cd-rom drive or whatever peripheral

2) boot the VM and press (f2 for bios) or esc? or f10 for boot menu( need to confirm)

3) run the try ubuntu and open Gparted

4) click to select the "linux-swap" partition and select menu partition>"swap-off"
5)click to select the extended partion and then resize/move and drag the selector
 to consume the entire unallocated space then hit "resize/move" button

6) Next, click linux-swap partition resize move, now MOVE this partition all the way to the end on the right side. 
 	- Now you will see a warning about moving the partition might cause your
	  OS to fail. Just hit ok and ignore.

7) select extended partion -> resize/move and decrease it to the smalles possible size by sliding the slider bar to the right.


8) Now select the main partition /dev/sda1  and resize/move
   - move the slider to consume the entire unallocated space and voila

9) Now Edit->Apply operations and it will no execute all the steps above

10) once done, shutdownt the live cd, unmount the cd-rom and reboot VM 



Use VM Workstation to expand the VMs disk: Settings > Hard Disk > Utilities > Expand (Disk Capacity) Start VM

On linux

sudo df -h
sudo fdisk -l

1) From the above you should see the Disk size has increased to the 
   value you chose in VM Workstation, but the linux VM does not know how to use it yet.

2) Download GParted (linux gui disk utility) download the iso 
   (for me gparted-live-0.19.1-4-amd64.iso) burn a bootable disk from this iso

3) Make sure your VM connects to the CD/DVD you are going to place the bootable 
   dvd back into your drive bay, but you need the VM to connect to it. 
   In Workstation right click on a running VM and you will see removeable devices. 
   Unfortunately, the VM needs to be running before you can see the removeable
   devices option. your-vm > removeable devices > CD/DVD > connect 
   now your vm connects to the dvd, but you still have to boot from it.

4) Use VM Workstation to boot to bios Select your VM (NOT running) > Power On > Power Odn to Bios 
   When bios menu comes up go over to Boot option Select the CD/DVD drive and hit (+) to move it up, 
   but (+) doesn’t work!! Use the (-) on the other options to move them down below CD/DVD F10 save/quit

5) Now you are booting from GParted I picked defaults, but still had to pick a keyboard, 
   US English We are now at the GUI for GParted You should see your current drive on the left, 
   followed by Extended>Swap, followed by the expanded-unallocated disk space you added

	
6) Select the linux-swap drive, then go the top menu select Partition > Swap Off (may not be needed)

   Using GParted Expand the Extended>Swap First Select which ever partition is adjacent 
   to the unallocated portion. In my case this was the Extended>Swap Partition. 
   
   NOTE: Make sure you selected the Extended, NOT the Swap! 
   Swap is inside the Extended. 
   
   Hit Move/Resize You should see the Extended partition 
   with unallocated space to the right. Expand the partition to consume all / most of 
   the unallocated space. Apply the change ( you probably can do multiple operations at once, 
   i did not) after a bit gparted shows the changed
   
   
	 

7) Move the Swap to the far right of Extended Partition You can see where this is going... 
   Select the swap, move to the right, now unallocated is on the left of it. Hit apply 
   Now select Extended and shrink it now unallocated is between the partition you want to 
   increase and extended. (Slide the left slider all the way to the left side 
   till you meet swap). apply 
   
   

8) now the main partition you want to extend shoudl be next to unallocation. increase the main as desired.


Simplified.
   i) select the Extended parent group attached to swap, click Resize and grow it to consume
      the entire unallocated space. -> Apply Changes 
	
   ii) Select the swap partition wiht mouse and click Resize again, now move the swap partiont
       all the way to the end (far right) of the unallocated space. --> apply
	   Warning msg will pop up, click ok to ignore.
	   
	iii) now click on Resize again and shrink the unallocated to the left til it reaches the 
	     Swap partition
		 warning msg will pop-up, click ok to ignore.
		 
	iv) now expand the sda1(main partition) to consume the unallocated. apply and voila

Increase your Partition Unfortunately, its like one of those puzzles you have to slide all the parts until you get to the one you want.

Shutdown GParted

Select you VM > Power> Power On to Bios, move CD/DVD down below HD

Now your VM is up and running with more space

Eject GParted DVD and/or Removeable Devices> Disconnect CD/DVD

You should be good to go!
